Self deception in Religion

When one considers that religion is false those who promote it must either be deceived or a deliberate fraud.
To what extent are people deliberately deceiving others and to what extent are they are being deceived.
One may say that a pedophile priest is being deliberately false but I am not sure that is always a full explanation.
How can one believe that something is evil and yet do it willingly?
The question is how does the mind work?
Is it possible for one part of the mind, one personality to be entirely separate from another and not know what the other is doing?
Is it possible to take delight in another harming themselves while another part of you thinks they are good?
I believe it is possible for one part of you to think one way and another part of you to think a different way.
One common thing amongst believers is to hold the idea that God will take care of everything but try your hardest to take
care of everything in case God doesn't.
I don't think they accept the inconsistency of saying that how you live doesn't matter if you are right with God and
building your own future.
That you can look forward to heaven but build your own career and set your own financial goals, believers do both.
It is ironic that believers in the promise of heaven are the most cowardly and conformist of people.
You might think that since heaven awaits this life can be used however and risked.
But no, they play it safe.
Partly it may be hedging one's bets but it is more to be fitting in to the community.
Man being a social animal either fits in with the group or dies.
The evolutionary impetus to either to conform or to master the social group is very strong.
Self confessing athiests are very rare in societies that hold to a religion.
Many people who hold different religious beliefs to the major view (including those who believe it is false)
will simply say nothing to avoid being targeted.
Many will say they believe in the majority belief when they simply don't to improve their position.
The question is whether a person can believe one thing and using a different part of the mind act in a way that is mutually
exclusive of that belief and for their believing side to be unaware that another part of their mind is driving their actions.
It is common for people who say they are 'christian' to act in a way that is opposed to the teachings of Christ.
Are they aware that the part of their mind that drives the action does not believe at all?
Some definitely are but what about the others?
The strongest desire is to fit into the community or at least not be targeted for abuse.
If one wants this but does not hold the belief in question one can do a number of things:
1) Pretend to believe it but not really believe it.
  This is the path of the liar or swindler and can be detected by polygraph and other lie spotting techniques.
2) Divide your mind into a believing section and a not believing section.
  This is the path of the hypocrite.
  Since you earnestly believe something deliberate lies will not be spotted.
  Inconsistencies can be pointed out but the response will be 'I am not perfect' or 'I am a sinner'.
3) There is a third way which can only work in societies with no state religion or that are tolerant of different views.
  That is a vaguing out or a sort of weak agnosticism.
